DOCS-740: Document the Session Management API and SessionsClient (#1680)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/program/apis/sessions.md

This is a [gRPC](https://grpc.io/) client that `viam-server` instantiates at robot runtime.
Find `SessionsClient` defined on [GitHub](https://github.com/viamrobotics/rdk/blob/main/robot/client/client.go).

{{% /tab %}}
{{% /tabs %}}

### Disable the sessions client

The `SessionsClient` is automatically enabled on your robot.
It is instantiated as part of your [`RobotClient`](/program/apis/#robot-api) instance (client of the Robot API).
If you want to disable it to keep any additional clients from authenticating to your robot's session while running a control program with Viam's client SDKs, you can pass the option to your robot, as demonstrated in the following code snippets:

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Python" %}}

```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
async def main():
    opts = RobotClient.Options(disable_sessions=True, ...)
    await RobotClient.at_address("my-robot-address", opts)
    robot = await connect()
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Go" %}}

> ```go {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}

Author: ```suggestion
```go {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
robot, err := client.New(ctx, "my-robot-address", logger, client.WithDisableSessions(), ...)
```

---
title: "Session Management with Viam's Client SDKs"
linkTitle: "Session Management API"
weight: 20
type: "docs"
description: "How to use the session management API with Viam's Client SDKs."
tags: ["client", "sdk", "viam-server", "networking", "apis", "robot api", "session", "sessions", "session management"]
---

The session management API provides support for robot session management.

A session:

- allows a client to express that it is actively connected or authenticated to `viam-server` on your robot
- supports stopping moving components when the connection is no longer active.

### Purpose of session management

> When controlling a robot or fleet with Viam, you want a way to understand the presence of the clients that are communicating with and authenticated to each robot's `viam-server` through Viam's various [resource APIs](/program/apis/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When controlling a robot or fleet with Viam, you want a way to understand the presence of the clients that are communicating with and authenticated to each robot's `viam-server`.
```
I wonder would this actually be more clear?

Author: Yeah, I think either one is fine technically but this change is simpler so lgtm-- implementing

---

The session management API provides support for robot session management.

A session:

- allows a client to express that it is actively connected or authenticated to `viam-server` on your robot
- supports stopping moving components when the connection is no longer active.

### Purpose of session management

When controlling a robot or fleet with Viam, you want a way to understand the presence of the clients that are communicating with and authenticated to each robot's `viam-server`.

The period of time during which these clients are present is called a *session*.
*Session management* is a presence mechanism between a client and `viam-server`.

Session management allows for safer operation of robots that physically move.
For example, imagine a wheeled rover gets a [`SetPower()`](/components/base/#setpower) command as the last input from a client before the connection to the robot is interrupted.
Without session management, the API request from the client sets the flow of electricity to the motors of the robot and then does not time out, causing the robot to continue driving forever, colliding with objects and people.

> With session management, if the robot does not receive a signal from the client at regular intervals, it will safely stop until the connection is reestablished.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With session management, if the robot does not receive a signal from the client at regular intervals, it safely stops until the connection is reestablished.
```
I think this passive voice was my fault to begin with but catching it now haha

> #### Clients and Viam's client SDKs

Reviewer: I find this title kinda odd because a client SDK can act as a client right? So it's kinda like "Rectangles and squares"? And then it goes on to talk about heartbeats too?

What would you think of titling this section "How session management works" or "Clients and heartbeats" or something?

Author: re. this I added a `heartbeats` section~~ see thread closer to top for more ref. info!

*Client* has multiple meanings for a Viam robot.
Essentially, it's anything that is receiving the information served by `viam-server` running on the robot.

A **client** can be an SDK script controlling the robot, an input controller, or just the different resources on the robot talking amongst themselves.

> For example, if you use Viam's module registry to [add modular resources to your robot](/extend/modular-resources/), the clients of your robot in its lifetime will include the "model servers" you instantiate on your robot for individual resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if you [add modular resources to your robot](/extend/modular-resources/), the clients of your robot include the "module servers" you instantiate on your robot for individual resources.
```
Can shorten. I'm less sure about module versus model, but it seems like module makes more sense?

Author: This should be kept model to be consistent with the other docs. I know it might seem like module makes more sense but the module refers to the mechanism and the model refers to the actual plans for design-- think of architecture, the docking mechanism vs the dock that is built.

Reviewer: How about 
```suggestion
For example, if you use Viam's module registry to [add modular resources to your robot](/extend/modular-resources/), the clients of your robot in its lifetime will include the "modular resource servers" you instantiate on your robot for individual resources.
```
then?

> Viam's session management API is your built-in solution to this.

Reviewer: As I said on a previous review, "this" is ambiguous. Solution to what? Grammatically, it is saying that it's the solution to the fact that "client" means multiple things. Again, I still think this sentence should be removed/replaced.

---
title: "Session Management with Viam's Client SDKs"
linkTitle: "Session Management API"
weight: 20
type: "docs"
description: "How to use the session management API with Viam's Client SDKs."
tags: ["client", "sdk", "viam-server", "networking", "apis", "robot api", "session", "sessions", "session management"]
---

When controlling a robot or fleet with Viam, you want a way to understand the presence of the clients that are communicating with and authenticated to each robot's `viam-server`.
The period of time during which these clients are present is called a *session*.

> Session management:

Author: @JessamyT Makes way more sense subtitling this as session management, thank you

### Disable default session management

The `SessionsClient` that serves the session management API is automatically enabled on your robot.
It is instantiated as part of your [`RobotClient`](/program/apis/#robot-api) instance (client of the Robot API).
If you want to disable it to keep any additional clients from authenticating to your robot's session while running a control program with Viam's client SDKs, you can pass the option to your robot, as demonstrated in the following code snippets:

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Python" %}}

```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
async def main():
    opts = RobotClient.Options(disable_sessions=True, ...)
    await RobotClient.at_address("my-robot-address", opts)
    robot = await connect()
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Go" %}}

```go {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
robot, err := client.New(ctx, "my-robot-address", logger, client.WithDisableSessions(), ...)
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="TypeScript" %}}

```ts {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
const robot = await VIAM.createRobotClient({
// ...
disableSessions: true
// ...
});
```

{{% /tab %}}

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

---
title: "Session Management with Viam's Client SDKs"
linkTitle: "Session Management API"
weight: 20
type: "docs"
description: "How to use the session management API with Viam's Client SDKs."
tags: ["client", "sdk", "viam-server", "networking", "apis", "robot api", "session", "sessions", "session management"]
---

When controlling a robot or fleet with Viam, you want a way to understand the presence of the clients that are communicating with and authenticated to each robot's `viam-server`.
The period of time during which these clients are present is called a *session*.

> Imagine a session as analogous to the lifetime of a robot in regards to its network connection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
see other thread on last go 'round

> A session:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Session management:
```

- allows a client to express that it is actively connected or authenticated to `viam-server` on your robot
- supports stopping moving components when the connection is no longer active.

> *Session management* is a presence mechanism between a client and `viam-server`, or, a way to manage the lifetime of the robot yourself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Session management* is a presence mechanism between a client and `viam-server`.
```

When controlling a robot or fleet with Viam, you want a way to understand the presence of the clients that are communicating with and authenticated to each robot's `viam-server`.
The period of time during which these clients are present is called a *session*.

> Imagine a session as analogous to the lifetime of a robot, in regards to its network connection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
I think this is confusing and doesn't add, because when I think of a "lifetime of a robot" I think of its entire lifetime, not just a session.

Author: You might imagine the lifetime of a robot differently, and that makes sense, but I still find it helpful to imagine a session in that way! is it ok if I leave this up or do you find it completely nonsensical? I think this whole thing will be a lot easier for users to understand w the clients ecosystem diagram thing

> The session management API provides support for robot session management.
> With default recourse configuration, sessions are automatically managed for you with Viam's `SessionsClient`, but if you want to manage sessions yourself, you can with Viam's sessions management API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With default configuration, sessions are automatically managed for you with Viam's `SessionsClient`.
If you want to manage sessions yourself, use Viam's sessions management API.
```

For example, imagine a wheeled rover gets a [`SetPower()`](/components/base/#setpower) command as the last input from a client before the connection to the robot is interrupted.
Without session management, the API request from the client sets the flow of electricity to the motors of the robot and then does not time out, causing the robot to continue driving forever, colliding with objects and people.

> With session management, if the robot does not receive a signal from the client at regular intervals, it safely stops until the connection is reestablished.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With session management, if the robot does not receive a signal from the client at regular intervals, it safely stops until the connection is reestablished.

```
This is a separate idea from the next few sentences because those are talking about how client can be various things but this isn't really about that even though it has the word "client" in it.

Author: Ok cool done!

A Viam robot has many clients because a client is anything that is receiving the information served by `viam-server` running on the robot, which includes the primary part, sub-parts, client SDKs, and more.

> A **client** within the ecosystem of Viam robot could be an SDK script controlling the robot, an input controller, or just the different resources on the robot talking amongst themselves.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A *client* of a Viam robot could be an SDK script controlling the robot, an input controller, or just the different resources on the robot talking amongst themselves.
```

> Viam's session management API's `SessionsClient` is a built-in solution that manages the connection between your robot's clients and your robot.

Author: @JessamyT I updated this part now to try and make the function of the (eric's) automated sessions client easier to understand! LMK what you think

Reviewer: Yeah I think this helps a lot

> For example, if you use Viam's module registry to [add modular resources to your robot](/extend/modular-resources/), the clients of your robot in its lifetime will include the "model servers" you instantiate on your robot for individual resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if you use Viam's module registry to [add modular resources to your robot](/extend/modular-resources/), the clients of your robot will include the "model servers" you instantiate on your robot for individual resources.
```
Edit like ^ if you think this really must stay in. But I think just delete this, because the sentence before provides examples.
```suggestion
```

Author: I think this is helpful-- implementing first suggestion but not removing

With the `SessionsClient`, if the robot does not receive a signal from the client at regular intervals, it safely stops until the connection is reestablished.

> Your client of the session management API maintains the session, telling the `viam-server` instance that it is still present every so often, or staying within the *heartbeat* window.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your client of the session management API maintains the session, telling the `viam-server` instance that it is still present every so often; in other words, staying within the *heartbeat* window.
```
"or" makes it sound like an either or such that it's ambiguous as to whether "telling the ...." is equivalent to or an option that is different from "staying within...."

#### Heartbeats

> A **heartbeat** is a signal that indicates robot connectivity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A *heartbeat* is a signal that indicates robot connectivity.
```
Use italics for new terms

Author: it'll give me a fail on the check, already tried that unfortunately. could we just keep this bold like is the case for client?

Reviewer: In what way is it failing checks? Is it saying it's inconsistent? in which case either try underscores instead or make sure there aren't any underscores-as-italics elsewhere in here

Reviewer: And client shouldn't be bold either :)

Author: I am thinking of https://docs.viam.com/extend/modular-resources/create/ info and other suggestions recently-- I have had both Naomi and Andrew suggest I use bold for this purpose. Is that not ok?

Author: Just confused. I know we've gone back and forth a lot on what we are using bold and italic for in terms of emphasis-- If we aren't doing **bold** for importance at all then I suppose more docs need to be changed

Author: but I would really prefer to just keep it and land this one so i can expand the usage section

Reviewer: Per offline convo yeah idk about emphasis either I just know about new terms!

Without session management, the API request from the client sets the flow of electricity to the motors of the robot and then does not time out, causing the robot to continue driving forever, colliding with objects and people.

With session management, if the robot does not receive a signal from the client at regular intervals, it safely stops until the connection is reestablished.

A Viam robot has many clients because a client is anything that is receiving the information served by `viam-server` running on the robot, which includes the primary part, sub-parts, client SDKs, and more.
A *client* of a Viam robot could be an SDK script controlling the robot, an input controller, or just the different resources on the robot talking amongst themselves.
For example, if you use Viam's module registry to [add modular resources to your robot](/extend/modular-resources/), the clients of your robot will include the "model servers" you instantiate on your robot for individual resources.

Viam's session management API is your built-in solution to manage this.

> Your client of the session management API maintains the session, telling the `viam-server` instance that it is still present every so often, or staying within the **heartbeat** window.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your client of the session management API maintains the session, telling the `viam-server` instance that it is still present every so often, or staying within the *heartbeat* window.
```

Author: ok done! not worth arguing about

For example, imagine a wheeled rover gets a [`SetPower()`](/components/base/#setpower) command as the last input from a client before the connection to the robot is interrupted.
Without session management, the API request from the client sets the flow of electricity to the motors of the robot and then does not time out, causing the robot to continue driving forever, colliding with objects and people.

With session management, if the robot does not receive a signal from the client at regular intervals, it safely stops until the connection is reestablished.

#### Clients and Viam's client SDKs

*Client* has multiple meanings for a Viam robot.
Essentially, it's anything that is receiving the information served by `viam-server` running on the robot.

A **client** can be an SDK script controlling the robot, an input controller, or just the different resources on the robot talking amongst themselves.
For example, if you use Viam's module registry to [add modular resources to your robot](/extend/modular-resources/), the clients of your robot in its lifetime will include the "model servers" you instantiate on your robot for individual resources.

> Viam's session management API is your built-in solution to manage this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
I realize you've added the word "manage" but "this" is still ambiguous and I still don't think this is a useful sentence. What is it meant to convey?

Author: "this" is the problem i'm talking about beforehand!

Reviewer: The problem being that client can mean lots of different things? That's what this is currently implying, but I don't think that's what it's meant to mean.

Author: client can mean lots of different things, yes, but there is only one session in question for the session management api. The session is what's being discussed, not the client

Author: I'll try and address your feedback but I'm sorry bc I too am getting confused 😆

Author: @JessamyT  would you suggest the specific noun be maybe something like "this dissonance in your session"?

Reviewer: Then what is the actual problem this solves? This section (under the client heading) just talks about how "client" can mean various things. Then it says "here's the solution to this problem," but what is the problem?

Reviewer: I don't think I understand what "dissonance in your session" actually means, but yeah something more specific than "this" is what I'm advocating for! Could talk synchronously about this maybe :D I'll slack you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Viam's session management API provides this functionality.
```
Okay, so, this will make sense if you move the "what is a client" type stuff (cut down to 2 sentences I think) into an info box before the purpose stuff. Then the "why" will flow directly into the "how".

Author: I think it makes sense as-is, is that ok? the this in question is the abundance of clients i'm discussing, then i go into the how of how it works.

Author: as-is after implementing your other suggestions!! @JessamyT

Reviewer: But again, I thought the problem is *not* the abundance of clients, but rather the potential for disconnection without timeout?

Author: The problem that's being solved here is wanting to turn off Automated Session Management (eric's session management client), ao that all calls to/through that API you'll now make yourself instead of viam/cloud run doing that for you. it's really an advanced use case

> Your client maintains the session, telling the `viam-server` instance that it is still present every so often, or staying within the **heartbeat** window.

Reviewer: As mentioned previously, you just talked about how a client can be lots of different things, so is it the case that each client maintains a separate session with `viam-server` or just one client does, even in the case of a robot with many parts? That needs to be clearer here.

#### Heartbeats

A **heartbeat** is a signal that indicates robot connectivity.
Essentially, "heartbeats" are a Viam robot's way of letting a user reading data from it know the different parts of it are "alive."

> Heartbeats are sent automatically from our clients (golang, python, and typescript) unless disabled via a client option or session management is not implemented by the server.

Author: ```suggestion
Heartbeats are sent automatically from our clients (golang, python, and typescript) unless you disable this with the session management API, or session management is not implemented by the server.
```

> As of now, heartbeats are sent at an interval that is 1/5th of the heartbeat window.

Author: ```suggestion
As of now, heartbeats are sent at an interval that is one fifth of the heartbeat window.
```

For example, if the heartbeat window is 5 seconds, clients will each send a heartbeat every 1 second.

> You can adjust the heartbeat window via the robot config.

Author: ```suggestion
You can adjust the heartbeat window through the configuration of your robot.
```

---
title: "Session Management with Viam's Client SDKs"
linkTitle: "Session Management API"
weight: 20
type: "docs"
description: "How to use the session management API with Viam's Client SDKs."
tags: ["client", "sdk", "viam-server", "networking", "apis", "robot api", "session", "sessions", "session management"]
---

The session management API provides support for robot session management.

A session:

- allows a client to express that it is actively connected or authenticated to `viam-server` on your robot
- supports stopping moving components when the connection is no longer active.

### Purpose of session management

When controlling a robot or fleet with Viam, you want a way to understand the presence of the clients that are communicating with and authenticated to each robot's `viam-server` through Viam's various [resource APIs](/program/apis/).

> The presence of these clients at one point in time is called a *session*.

Reviewer: Per my comment on the last go 'round, is this right? I think it's actually a period of time, not the presence of something at a point in time, right?

Author: Great point-- this was weird phrasing I copied-- LMK if you think updated phrasing is more sensible

> The presence of these clients at one point in time is called a *session*.

Author: ```suggestion
The period of time during which these clients are present is called a *session*.
```

> A session technically is any presence mechanism at the RDK application layer maintained by any client with `viam-server`.

Reviewer: Same here--I think it's true that session management has a whole lot to do with mechanisms for monitoring presence, but session =/= presence mechanism.

Author: I had tried to adapt this part but the old docs wording is wild sometimes 😆 i think it's a byproduct of having engineers write docs bc what's technically true might not be particularly easy to understand

Reviewer: Yeah I was cross referencing that doc with this as I made my first review pass. We are under no obligation to keep any wording that doesn't make sense :D

Reviewer: This sentence is ambiguous with respect to whether it's maintained between a client and `viam-server`, or whether it's maintained, by a client that has `viam-server`.

How about
```suggestion
*Session management* is a presence mechanism between a client and `viam-server`.
```

Author: LGTM adding

Session management allows for safer operation of robots that physically move.
Specifically, without session management, controls that would be "sticky" (for example [`SetPower()` of a base](/components/base/#setpower)) based on the last input of a **client**, meaning the API request from the client sets the flow of electricity on a part of the robot and then does not time out, could lead to **having a robot trying to continue doing what it was told to do forever.**

You do not want that to happen.

#### Clients and Viam's client SDKs

*Client* has multiple meanings for a Viam robot.
Essentially, it's anything that is receiving the information served by `viam-server` running on the robot.

A **client** can be an SDK script controlling the robot, an input controller, or just the different resources on the robot talking amongst themselves.
For example, if you use Viam's module registry to [add modular resources to your robot](/extend/modular-resources/), the clients of your robot in its lifetime will include the "model servers" you instantiate on your robot for individual resources.

Viam's session management API is your built-in solution to this.

> Your client maintains the session, telling the `viam-server` instance that it is still present every so often, or staying within the heartbeat window.

Reviewer 2: You can adjust the heartbeat window via the robot config (needs to be done through raw JSON at the moment):

```json
  ...
  "network": {
    "sessions": {
      "heartbeat_window": "30s"
    }
  },
  ...
```

The default heartbeat window is 2 seconds if this configuration is omitted.

Reviewer: Would it be correct to say
```suggestion
Each client maintains a session, telling the `viam-server` instance that it is still present every so often, or staying within the heartbeat window.
```
The page just talked about how there are multiple meanings of client. So, do all of them maintain sessions or just one?

Reviewer 2: Just one

e.g. the python sdk maintains one session - it does *not* create a new session for each component/service client it manages

Author: ^ I think this is consistent with current proposed docs so no changed needed?

Your client must send at least one session heartbeat within this window.
As soon as the window lapses/expires, the server will safely stop all resources that are marked for safety monitoring that have been last used by that session, and no others; a lapsed client will attempt to establish a new session immediately prior to the next operation it performs.

## Usage

Usage of the session management API differs across [Viam's SDKS](/program/).

### Manage on-robot sessions

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Go" %}}

> To use the [Session Management API](https://pkg.go.dev/go.viam.com/rdk/session) the Go Client SDK provides, use your [`RobotClient`](/program/apis/#robot-api) instance (client of the Robot API) to instantiate a `SessionsManager` with `SessionManager()`.

Reviewer 2: No need to instantiate a separate `SessionsManager` client - one will be instantiated when you start a robot client. Instead, you should disable sessions by passing the following option to the robot client:

```go
robot, err := client.New(ctx, "my-robot-address", logger, client.WithDisableSessions(), ...)
```

Author: done/changed

The `Session Management API` is not currently provided in the Python SDK.
Use the Go Client SDK instead.

### Manage sessions for robot clients

First, use your [`RobotClient()`](/program/apis/#robot-api) instance to access the [`SessionsClient`](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/sessions_client/index.html#viam.sessions_client.SessionsClient) within your Python Client SDK program.
This is a [gRPC](https://grpc.io/) client that `viam-server` instantiates at robot runtime.
Find `SessionsClient` defined on [GitHub](https://github.com/viamrobotics/rdk/blob/main/robot/client/client.go).

{{% /tab %}}
{{% /tabs %}}

### Disable the sessions client

The `SessionsClient` is automatically enabled on your robot.
If you want to disable it to keep any additional clients from authenticating to your robot's session while running a control program with Viam's client SDKs, access your `SessionsClient` instance with the `disabled` parameter set to `True`, as shown in the following Python code snippet:

```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
async def main():
    robot = await connect()
    sessions = SessionsClient.(channel: Channel, disabled: bool = True)

> ```

Author: Awesome, thank you Max! Will add and comment once addressed

> ```

Author: done

> ```

Author: Retroactive oops, I have not added yet for typescript but I think your comment with that may be connected to this comment thread? Adding now

> ```

Author: done!

A **client** can be an SDK script controlling the robot, an input controller, or just the different resources on the robot talking amongst themselves.
For example, if you use Viam's module registry to [add modular resources to your robot](/extend/modular-resources/), the clients of your robot in its lifetime will include the "model servers" you instantiate on your robot for individual resources.

Viam's session management API is your built-in solution to this.
Your client maintains the session, telling the `viam-server` instance that it is still present every so often, or staying within the heartbeat window.

Your client must send at least one session heartbeat within this window.
As soon as the window lapses/expires, the server will safely stop all resources that are marked for safety monitoring that have been last used by that session, and no others; a lapsed client will attempt to establish a new session immediately prior to the next operation it performs.

## Usage

Usage of the session management API differs across [Viam's SDKS](/program/).

### Manage on-robot sessions

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Go" %}}

> To use the [Session Management API](https://pkg.go.dev/go.viam.com/rdk/session) the Go Client SDK provides, use your [`RobotClient`](/program/apis/#robot-api) instance (client of the Robot API) to instantiate a `SessionsManager` with `SessionManager()`.

Author: ```suggestion
To use the [Session Management API](https://pkg.go.dev/go.viam.com/rdk/session) the Go Client SDK provides, use your [`RobotClient`](/program/apis/#robot-api) instance (client of the Robot API).
Pass the following option to the robot client:
```

### Sessions for RobotClients

First, use your [`RobotClient()`](/program/apis/#robot-api) instance to access the [`SessionsClient`](https://pkg.go.dev/go.viam.com/rdk/session) within your Go Client SDK program.
This is a [gRPC](https://grpc.io/) client that `viam-server` instantiates at robot runtime.
Find `SessionsClient` defined on [Github](https://github.com/viamrobotics/rdk/blob/main/robot/client/client.go).

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="Python" %}}

### On-Robot Session Management

The `Session Management API` is not currently provided in the Python SDK.
Use the Go Client SDK instead.

### Manage sessions for robot clients

First, use your [`RobotClient()`](/program/apis/#robot-api) instance to access the [`SessionsClient`](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/sessions_client/index.html#viam.sessions_client.SessionsClient) within your Python Client SDK program.
This is a [gRPC](https://grpc.io/) client that `viam-server` instantiates at robot runtime.
Find `SessionsClient` defined on [GitHub](https://github.com/viamrobotics/rdk/blob/main/robot/client/client.go).

{{% /tab %}}
{{% /tabs %}}

### Disable the sessions client

> The `SessionsClient` is automatically enabled on your robot.

Author: ```suggestion
The `SessionsClient` is automatically enabled on your robot.
It is instantiated as part of your [`RobotClient`](/program/apis/#robot-api) instance (client of the Robot API).
```

If you want to disable it to keep any additional clients from authenticating to your robot's session while running a control program with Viam's client SDKs, access your `SessionsClient` instance with the `disabled` parameter set to `True`, as shown in the following Python code snippet:

```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
async def main():

>     robot = await connect()

Author: ```suggestion
    opts = RobotClient.Options(disable_sessions=True, ...)
    await RobotClient.at_address("my-robot-address", opts)
    robot = await connect()
```

>     sessions = SessionsClient.(channel: Channel, disabled: bool = True)

Author: ```suggestion
```

> ```

Author: ```suggestion
```

```

---

> title: "Sessions Management with Viam's Client SDKs"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Session Management with Viam's Client SDKs"
```

linkTitle: "Session Management API"
weight: 20
type: "docs"

> description: "How to use the Sessions Management API with Viam's Client SDKs."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "How to use the session management API with Viam's Client SDKs."
```
Pick session or sessions and make all throughout here the same. Also headings -> sentence case, and lower case session management (or sessions management if you go that route)

Author: Sounds good to me 😆, thank you!

Author: done

tags: ["client", "sdk", "viam-server", "networking", "apis", "robot api", "session", "sessions", "session management"]
---

> The Session Management API provides support for robot session management.

Author: I think you're right, adding

A Session allows a **client** to express that it is actively connected or authenticated to `viam-server` on your robot and

> supports stopping actuating components when the connection is no longer active.

Author: I think the point is that you can vs that it automatically does that? I could be confused but I think first one is better- thank you for the suggestion!

> supports stopping actuating components when the connection is no longer active.

Reviewer: Yes--I think the first one makes it sound like you can but it doesn't automatically do that, so it's a little ambiguous but maybe that's correct?

> {{< alert title="Info" color="info" >}}
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
This doesn't need to be in an alert box; can just be an intro section.

Author: done

### Purpose of Session Management

> When controlling a robot or fleet with the Viam platform, you want some kind of protocol or system-wide means to understand the presence of the clients that are talking and authenticated to each robot's `viam-server` through Viam's various [resource APIs](/program/apis/).

Author: I agree, first reword might be better to show off fleet management

> When controlling a robot or fleet with the Viam platform, you want some kind of protocol or system-wide means to understand the presence of the clients that are talking and authenticated to each robot's `viam-server` through Viam's various [resource APIs](/program/apis/).

Reviewer: "When controlling a robot or fleet with Viam" is kinda implied/obvious though so should probably be deleted

> The presence of these clients at one point in time can be referred to as a "session".

Author: Adding! I think it's hard to get conceptually and hard to phrase. Using _is_ is definitely better, though

> The presence of these clients at one point in time can be referred to as a "session".

Reviewer: Yeah it's tricky, and I Googled it for a bit before making that comment^^ to see if there are other ways of conceptualizing and/or phrasing it. Everyone seems to have a hard time putting it into words :D But I think it can be improved. In this case, is it indeed more of a period of time?

A session technically is any presence mechanism at the RDK application layer maintained by any client with `viam-server`.
Session management, as explained here, allows for safer robotic operation when you are dealing with moving parts on the robot (the "actuating controls").

> 

Author: done

> Specifically, without session management, controls that would be "sticky" (e.g. SetPower of a base) based on the last input of a **client**, meaning the API request from the client sets the flow of electricity on a part of the robot and then does not time out, could lead to **having a robot trying to continue doing what it was told to do forever.**

Author: ```suggestion
Specifically, without session management, controls that would be "sticky" (for example [`SetPower()` of a base](/components/base/#setpower)) based on the last input of a **client**, meaning the API request from the client sets the flow of electricity on a part of the robot and then does not time out, could lead to **having a robot trying to continue doing what it was told to do forever.**
```

> You do not want that to happen.

Author: this is kind of a weird sentence but want to stress that that particular scenario is not ideal?

Author: also with the weird bold that's diff from normal docs usage, just kinda want to stress those parts-- but can remove

> Specifically, without session management, controls that would be "sticky" (for example [`SetPower()` of a base](/components/base/#setpower)) based on the last input of a **client**, meaning the API request from the client sets the flow of electricity on a part of the robot and then does not time out, could lead to **having a robot trying to continue doing what it was told to do forever.**
> 
> You do not want that to happen.

Reviewer: Suggestion:
```suggestion
For example, imagine a wheeled rover gets a [`SetPower()`](/components/base/#setpower)) command as the last input from a client before the connection to the robot is interrupted.
Without session management, the API request from the client sets the flow of electricity to the motors of the robot and then does not time out, causing the robot to continue driving forever, colliding with objects and people.

With session management, if the robot does not receive a signal from the client at regular intervals, it will safely stop until the connection is reestablished.
```

Reviewer: @sguequierre thoughts on this rework?

Author: This way of phrasing it is really good/a lot easier to understand, sorry @ delay -- I was leaving this up to read through properly during last pass 😆 will implement now

> #### Clients and Viam's Client SDKs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Clients and Viam's client SDKs
```
default to sentence case

Author: done, thank you

> A client has multiple meanings for a Viam robot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Client* has multiple meanings for a Viam robot.
```

Author: Done

Essentially, it's anything that is receiving the information served by `viam-server` running on the robot.

A **client** can be an SDK script controlling the robot, an input controller, or just the different resources on the robot talking amongst themselves.

> For example, if you use Viam's module registry to [add modular resources to your robot](/extend/modular-resources/), the clients of your robot in its lifetime will include the "model servers" you instantiate on your robot for individual resources.

Reviewer: I think this part about what a client is could go into an "Info" alert box if you want. It feels like a separate interjection for clarification, whereas everything else in this intro feels like intro body text I think.

> Viam's Session Management API is your built-in solution to this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Viam's session management API is your built-in solution to this.
```
To what though? This sentence sounds like session management solves the problem of Viam having different meanings for "client," and I don't think that's the intent, but I don't know that I have a good enough understanding of the goal of this section to make a good suggestion.

Maybe this paragraph (just these two sentences) can be removed?

Reviewer: @sguequierre This comment is still unaddressed

Your client maintains the session, telling the `viam-server` instance that it is still present every so often, or staying within the heartbeat window.

> Your client must send at least one session heartbeat within this window.

Author: need to add more info about how to send a session heartbeat likely if this stays here on line 40

Reviewer: Okay; I think there's a way to transition from the part about what happens without session management into this part nicely, but will wait to make suggestions until after this is done.

Reviewer 2: Heartbeats are sent automatically from our clients (golang, python, and typescript) unless disabled via a client option or session management is not implemented by the server. 

As of now, heartbeats are sent at an interval that is 1/5th of the heartbeat window (e.g. if the heartbeat window is 5 seconds, clients will send a heartbeat every 1 second).

Author: @JessamyT What would you think about me making this part a separate page/a second-half ticket of this? wondering if could merge as is to get this info up and then add a lot more about heartbeats, but maybe i should just do it now lol

Reviewer: I don't think it needs to be a whole second page? Maybe just incorporate it now? I think some of this stuff can be kinda combined/made smooth and succinct, and the basics of heartbeats are sorta part of how the whole thing works so it's important to at least have high level info about that.

Reviewer: But if you think there need to be lots of details added, sure, can be a separate PR to modify this page.

Author: yeah i just want to get this part up first tbh but i can find time to add this in 🤷‍♀️ That makes sense that it's fundamental

Author: Will comment here when done

Author: Ok @maximpertsov @JessamyT I think I have added the necessary info for users for client heartbeats now, sorry for delay here

As soon as the window lapses/expires, the server will safely stop all resources that are marked for safety monitoring that have been last used by that session, and no others; a lapsed client will attempt to establish a new session immediately prior to the next operation it performs.

> {{< /alert >}}
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: done/remove info along with top

## Usage

> Usage of the Sessions Management API differs across [Viam's SDKS](/program/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Usage of the session management API differs across [Viam's SDKS](/program/).
```
be consistent with session or sessions

Author: done, thank you

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Manage on-robot sessions

```
Why not put your tabs in here, since it looks like this is the only part that differs between Go and Python, and then you'll get a handy heading in the right nav?

Author: good idea!!

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Go" %}}

> ### On-Robot Session Management
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

To use the [Session Management API](https://pkg.go.dev/go.viam.com/rdk/session) the Go Client SDK provides, use your [`RobotClient`](/program/apis/#robot-api) instance (client of the Robot API) to instantiate a `SessionsManager` with `SessionManager()`.

### Sessions for RobotClients

First, use your [`RobotClient()`](/program/apis/#robot-api) instance to access the [`SessionsClient`](https://pkg.go.dev/go.viam.com/rdk/session) within your Go Client SDK program.
This is a [gRPC](https://grpc.io/) client that `viam-server` instantiates at robot runtime.
Find `SessionsClient` defined on [Github](https://github.com/viamrobotics/rdk/blob/main/robot/client/client.go).

> {{% /tab %}}

Reviewer: I recommend putting just the on-robot session management content into the tabs, and taking the Sessions for robot clients part out of tabs. Agnosticize the sessions for robot clients part by changing "Go Client SDK" to just "client SDK"

Author: A little confused here-- why do you recommend?

Reviewer: The "Manage sessions for robot clients" and "Sessions for RobotClients" content for Python and Go is identical except for the mention of Go vs Python. So instead of having them as tabbed content, take that out of the tabs. Move it to one "Manage sessions for robot clients" heading with no tabs.

Reviewer: Keep the "Manage sessions on-robot" heading and put tabs for python and go under that since that part *is* different between the two languages (since it's unsupported for Python). LMK if you wanna jump in a video call if still confused about what I mean.

Reviewer: Keep the "Manage sessions on-robot" heading and put tabs for python and go under that since that part *is* different between the two languages (since it's unsupported for Python). LMK if you wanna jump in a video call if still confused about what I mean.

{{% tab name="Python" %}}

### On-Robot Session Management

The `Session Management API` is not currently provided in the Python SDK.
Use the Go Client SDK instead.

> ### Sessions for RobotClients

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Manage sessions for robot clients
```
or something more active

Author: done

Author: Unsure about removing `RobotClient` but I think "robot clients" is probably fine

Reviewer: Either way

First, use your [`RobotClient()`](/program/apis/#robot-api) instance to access the [`SessionsClient`](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/sessions_client/index.html#viam.sessions_client.SessionsClient) within your Python Client SDK program.
This is a [gRPC](https://grpc.io/) client that `viam-server` instantiates at robot runtime.

> Find `SessionsClient` defined on [Github](https://github.com/viamrobotics/rdk/blob/main/robot/client/client.go).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Find `SessionsClient` defined on [GitHub](https://github.com/viamrobotics/rdk/blob/main/robot/client/client.go).
```

Author: done

{{% /tab %}}
{{% /tabs %}}

> ### Disable the Sessions Client

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Disable the sessions client
```

Author: done

The `SessionsClient` is automatically enabled on your robot.

> If you want to disable it to keep any additional clients from authenticating to your robot's session while running a control program with Viam's Client SDKs, access your `SessionsClient` instance with the `disabled` parameter set to false, as shown in the following Python code snippet:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to disable it to keep any additional clients from authenticating to your robot's session while running a control program with Viam's client SDKs, access your `SessionsClient` instance with the `disabled` parameter set to `True`, as shown in the following Python code snippet:
```
True or false? The snippet says True

```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
async def main():
    opts = RobotClient.Options(disable_sessions=True, ...)
    await RobotClient.at_address("my-robot-address", opts)

>     robot = await connect()

Author: ```suggestion
    robot = await connect()
```

```go {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}

```
```
